---
title: About Me
layout: post
permalink: "/aboutme"
image: /img/slefie.jpg
subtitle: Why My Blog Rocks
description: So you want to be a <em>brogrammer</em> or <em><a href="https://twitter.com/cecilebaird/status/398132761032413185">sisgrammer</a></em> but don't know where to start huh? Don't worry - I was in your shoes (honestly, probably still am). Focusing on NodeJS and ExpressJS, I'll bring you into the world of modern day web apps.
---

### The Noob Programmer

If you've ever been introduced to programming, you probably already know how overwhelming it all seems. Seriously. There are like so many different programming languages that are being created, updated, and exterminated. The tech industry is so new and shiny that everyone and their rich, childless uncle is throwing money at it. Venture Capitalists are pouring millions of dollars into tech companies all over the Valley (and sometimes the <a href="https://www.google.com/maps/@40.7808286,-73.958395,12z"> Alley </a> too!). 

Become a Software Engineer hasn't been this lucrative since <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Google#Financing_and_initial_public_offering"> Google went public</a> in 2004 and literally made its employees millionaires in one day. 

<br>

<b>There's lots of money to be made, but how do we get our hands on it?</b>

<br>

### A Litte About Me

My name is <a href="http://mushaheedkapadia.com">Mushaheed Kapadia</a> - but everyone calls me "Mush". I'm finished my senior year at <a href="http://rutgers.edu">Rutgers University</a> studying <a href="http://cs.rutgers.edu">Computer Science</a> (BS). Most recently, I was a <em> part-time lecturer </em> at <a href="http://njgifted.org">Heroes Academy</a> where I taught Python and Scratch. Currently, I'm sitting at home, blogging and working on more side projects.

In July, I'm moving out to the West Coast to be a Software Engineer at <a href="http://hearsaysocial.com"> Hearsay Social</a>. 

<br>

### What I'm Here For

I'm here to give some insight into the fact that programming isn't very hard at all. You don't need to be a no-life loser to be good at it, and you definitely don't need to be one to get your dream job (assuming your dream job is to be a (modern day) Software Engineer).

Coming into college, I was pre-med. That changed after I took my first Computer Science course at Rutgers. But even after falling in love with Computer Science, I wasn't a huge fan of programming. I love Computer Science theory, and I really wanted to go into Cryptography (basically the more math-y part of Computer Science). 

It wasn't until I went to my first hackathon at the University of Michigan that I actually wanted to programming <em>(read: hacking)</em>. There was just something about working on my own project where I got to decide what to do that made me fall in love. I mean I didn't know much about programming when I started. I had absolutely no clue how to even use an API, let alone incorporte it into my apps. The only thing I had to start off with was that I wanted to be <strike>programmer</strike> <em>Software Engineer</em>.

<br>

### Who This Blog Is For

So hopefully all that stuff made sense to you. This blog isn't really meant to teach you Computer Science, or even teach you how to code. There are a lot of helpful tutorials and blogs that already do that. This is a blog for me to help you understand and learn some of the newer technologies. The programming world is always changing and new frameworks and environments. I'm here to keep you updated until you're well enough on your way to figure things out on your own. My posts will be very basic and skip over a lot of the intricate details. I'll try my best to explain everything in a simple way, as well as to adhere to "good" programming practices. 