---
title: Introduction to NodeJS
subtitle: TNP:CS:101
description: NodeJS is cool. This post is a quick introduction to NodeJS and npm (Node's package manager). Goes over one of the most important parts of NodeJS.
layout: post
image: /img/nodejs-logo.png
---

### Before You Begin 

So you're ready to step into the Internet and make your first web application. You've Google'd around and realized you're completely lost. It's basically all magic right?


####<em><b> Fuck That. </b></em>

<b><a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dkrzZ8-gfn0">It's not magic. It's talent. And sweat.</a></b>

Alright, well. Like every new thing you wanna try - you can't just quite hop right into it. We need to get you geared up to be a real developer. We need to install <a href="http://nodejs.org">NodeJS</a> and <a href="http://npmjs.com">npm</a>.

<em> But what are they? </em> <small><a href="#how-to-get-started">Click here to skip to the installation instructions.</a></small>

#### NodeJS

>Node.js® is a platform built on Chrome's JavaScript runtime for easily building fast, scalable network applications. Node.js uses an event-driven, non-blocking I/O model that makes it lightweight and efficient, perfect for data-intensive real-time applications that run across distributed devices.
<small><em>Shamelessly stolen from: <a href="http://nodejs.org/">NodeJS's Homepage</a></em></small> 

##### What does that mean? 
So normally, when you call a function, the function executes and all of life stops and waits for it to return. Code is executed in order, one line at a time. If you want to load up a file from the drive, the program stops running until the file is loaded. While we don't think of it as "bad" because computers today are pretty fast, this takes a lot of time (relatively)! The time that we spend waiting around for reads/writes/functions to execute could be better spent doing other things. 

NodeJS is all about using this extra time to do other stuff. While you're waiting for some function to execute, NodeJS lets you go ahead and start doing other stuff (like calling more asynchornous functions!), and when that previous function finishes executing (reading a file, doing some complicated math, etc), you can do what you wanted to do with that data. 

That just got confusing huh? 

Alright so let's break it down. Say you want to encrypt a user's password. You have a function called `encrypt`, and inside this function you do some complicated math-y stuff that takes some time.

{% highlight js linenos %}
function encrypt(password){
    var encrypted_password = password; 
    //fancy complicated math here
    return encrypted_password; 
}

var password = "c4n7h4xm3";
var encrypted_password = "";

encrypted_password = encrypt(password); 

console.log(encrypted_password);

{% endhighlight %}

So normally, this piece of code would execute step by step, and when you got to line 12, you would actually print out `encrypted_password`. Simple enough yeah?

Using NodeJS, however, you'd end up `console.log()`ing a blank string. This is because despite NodeJS telling the function `encrypt` to start executing, <b>it continues onto the next line (line 12) immediately without waiting for the function to return.</b>

You:

> Okay, so we get that. Great, we can leave long-running functions running in the background and do other stuff. What about when it's done? How do we actually do something with the functions we write? 


So in order to actually make stuff happen after our function ends, we need to pass it a `callback`, <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CHhvZW37PhI">which is just fancy people talk for "do this function after you do that function"</a>.

So here's how we make a function with a `callback` in NodeJS: 

{% highlight js linenos %}

function encrypt(password, next){
    var encrypted_password = password; 
    //fancy complicated math here
    next(false, encrypted_password); //call the next function in lieu of a return call
}

var password = "c4n7h4xm3";

encrypt(password, function(err, encrypted_password){
   console.log(encrypted_password); 
});

{% endhighlight %}

Here you can see that our `encrypt` function takes in another argument: `next`. So what is this `next` argument? `next` is basically the code that we want to execute after (<small>or <em>wait for it...</em></small> <b><em>next</em></b>) our `encrypt` function is finished executing. We pass the code in as another function as you can see on line 9. 

So instead of waiting for the function to finish, we code in an `anonymous function` to do what we want after the function. You'll see this a lot when we're working with NodeJS. 

So hopefully, that cleared up a bit about what `asynchronous` mean, and how NodeJS handles it. If it didn't - don't worry - things make sense more as you do them. I didn't understand the concept of `callback`s for quite a while after I started learning NodeJS. It was a couple months before the lightbulb clicked on how to do it properly. 

#### NPM (Node Package Manager)

> npm is a package manager for JavaScript, and is the default for Node.js. As of Node.js version 0.6.3, npm is bundled and installed automatically with the environment. npm runs through the command line and manages dependencies for an application.
<small><em>Shamelessly stolen from <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Npm_%28software%29">Wikipedia's article on NPM</a>

##### What does that mean?

So a lot of programming languages and operating systems have their own package managers: python has easy_install, ruby has gems, and even php <small style="color:red;">vomits</small> has pear <small style="color:red;">vomitting intensifies</small>. Package managers are easy ways to get code that someone wrote to do solve some specfic problem. That someone uploads their "package" or solution to the package manager, so that eveyrone else can use it by downloading it using the package manager. This way, we can use a tried and tested solution to our problem without having to rewrite the same code. Unlike regular old school, the real world doesn't want you to rewrite the C Socket API to emulate a TCP connection on top of UDP sockets. 

Using the various npm packages that are availible, you'll be able to do more by getting past problems that have already been solved. 

<br/>

### How to Get Started

Most likely you're on one of three different types of systems: 

* [Windows](#windows)
* [Linux](#linux)
* [OSX](#osx)

#### Installation Instructions

Note: `npm` is now built in with `NodeJS`.

##### Windows

If you want to be a better programmer and you're a on a Windows device, delete Windows (or do a dual boot at least) and install a Linux distro and continue on to the [Linux Set Up](#linux). Windows sucks. 

My personal favorite (and one of the popular ones) is [Ubuntu](http://www.ubuntu.com/download).

<small>If you really want to use NodeJS through Windows follow the instructions to install [NodeJS on Windows](http://nodejs.org/download/)</small>

##### Linux

If you're using Linux you're off to a great start as a programmer. Now head over to the nearest trashcan and throw out your laptop. Next find your way to an Apple store and buy yourself a god damn Macbook (Air or Pro - doesn't matter).

<small>If you're dead set on using a Linux distro, here you go cheapass: [NodeJS on Linux](http://nodejs.org/download/) 

##### OSX

Aren't Macs just great? I love my Macbook Air. I used to think Windows was great, until I started using Linux. And after I got my first Macbook Air - I'll never go back to using Windows again. 

Anyways, [NodeJS on Mac](http://nodejs.org/download/) to download and install it. 

<br/>

Once you've installed NodeJS on your device, you're ready to move on to making your first application with ExpressJS. 